🛡️ Wazuh Installation & File Integrity Monitoring (FIM) – Blue Team Task Report
1️⃣ Objective

The goal of this task was to deploy Wazuh on a Windows endpoint and configure File Integrity Monitoring (FIM) to track real-time changes in critical system files and directories.

This setup enables early detection of unauthorized modifications, file tampering, or suspicious activity, providing a robust Blue Team defense layer for system security monitoring.

2️⃣ Tools Used

Wazuh Agent (Windows) – Endpoint monitoring agent

Wazuh Manager – Centralized log and alert server

Windows 10/11 OS – Test environment

Notepad/PowerShell – Configuration edits and commands

Screenshot Tools – Documentation and evidence capture

3️⃣ Installation Steps

Downloaded Wazuh Agent MSI installer from the official site.

Ran installer as Administrator, following installation wizard prompts.

Configured agent to communicate with the Wazuh Manager (manager IP added in config).

Started the agent service:

net start WazuhAgent


Verified agent-manager connection:

agent_control.exe -u

4️⃣ FIM Configuration

Opened ossec.conf located at:
C:\Program Files (x86)\ossec-agent\ossec.conf

Configured <syscheck> section to monitor critical directories:

C:\CriticalFolder

C:\Windows\System32

Enabled monitoring options:

check_all="yes" – Monitor all changes (hash, permissions, timestamps)

alert_new_files="yes" – Notify on new file creation

alert_perm="yes" – Notify on permission changes

Excluded temporary/log files to reduce false positives:

*.tmp, *.log

Saved configuration and restarted agent:

net stop WazuhAgent
net start WazuhAgent

5️⃣ Testing & Validation

Performed file operations in monitored directories:

Created, modified, and deleted test files

Verified that alerts were generated in logs:

C:\Program Files (x86)\ossec-agent\logs\ossec.log


Captured screenshots of alerts for documentation (stored in Screenshots/)

✅ All monitored events were correctly detected and logged.

6️⃣ Observations

FIM successfully captured all file changes in real-time.

Alerts included:

File creation

File modification

File deletion

Permission changes

Exclusion rules effectively minimized false positives from temporary or log files.

Demonstrates how endpoint monitoring provides continuous visibility into system integrity.

7️⃣ Conclusion

The Wazuh installation and FIM configuration were successfully completed. This setup:

Provides real-time monitoring of critical files

Enables early detection of potential system compromise

Illustrates a Blue Team security workflow for maintaining endpoint integrity

Can be expanded to include alert automation, reporting, and centralized management

✅ This task forms a solid foundation for proactive threat detection and incident response in Windows environments.
